---
title: Errorbank - TODO
author: Leventemo
pubDatetime: 2025-06-30T15:10:43Z
postSlug: errorbank-categories
draft: true
tags:
  - databases
  - language
description: "Up next."
---

## Table of contents

## up next

* clean up categories post
* update the create statements
* backup
* upgradee PostGres to 17.
* add log table
* C/U: mention the difficulty of categorizing it in "categories" - meaning or form or use? - inherently mng but surfaces as form:  *informations* or use: *an information*

look into PG12+ "generated columns with stored expressions" for inclusive categories
```sql
CREATE TABLE mytable (
  id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
  flag1 BOOLEAN DEFAULT FALSE,
  flag2 BOOLEAN GENERATED BY DEFAULT AS (flag1) STORED
);
```
* "in this case, flag2 is generated based on the value of flag1, but you can still update flag2 independently using an UPDATE statement"
* better than a trigger as it is at a db design level

## to decide

should verb patterns be a POOL?
* and __include indirect_obj__?
* eg. **I can give to you my bike.*
	+ a preposition error
	+ a verb pattern error
  + an indirect object error

should __sing_plur__ be a POOL?
* and overlap with __adj__?
* eg. *about my places favourites* -> *about my favourite places*

should __syntax__ > __adj__ go deeper to?
* __syntax__ > __adj__ > __sing_plur__
* __syntax__ > __adj__ > __word_order__

## second round

* watch out for new categories:
	+ __vocab.register__ errors
	+ __vocab.use__ errors (esp. those included in __vocab.form__ in 1st round) - along with form (not exactly the same)
* rename:
	+ assignment table -> assignmentS
	+ syntax table -> use (?)
* introduce frequency-markers?
	+ unified abstractions for calculating frequency

skim through textbooks for categories & extend catergories tree if necessary

samples at all levels and refine categories tree
