---
title: Errorbank
author: Leventemo
pubDatetime: 2025-05-31T15:10:43Z
postSlug: errorbank
featured: false
draft: true
tags:
  - databases
  - language
description: "Working out principles of designing a database of errors made by Spanish speakers when using English."
---

## TODO

to include in vocab:
* irreg verbs
* irreg plurals
* C/U
* use, along with form (not exactly the same)

look into PG12+ "generated columns with stored expressions" for inclusive categories
```
CREATE TABLE mytable (
  id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
  flag1 BOOLEAN DEFAULT FALSE,
  flag2 BOOLEAN GENERATED BY DEFAULT AS (flag1) STORED
);
```
* "in this case, flag2 is generated based on the value of flag1, but you can still update flag2 independently using an UPDATE statement"
* better than a trigger as it is at a db desig level

update categories tree
update the create statements below

2ND ROUND:
* watch out for new categories:
	+ __vocab.register__ errors
	+ __vocab.use__ errors (esp. those included in __vocab.form__ in 1st round)
* rename:
	+ assignment table -> assignmentS
	+ syntax table -> use (?)
	+ spelling table -> writing_mechanics
		- orthography -> spelling
		- capitals -> capitalization

rewrite spelling (l1driven) & capitals (distinct exclusive) as inclusive: spelling contains capitals?

skim through textbooks for categories & extend catergories tree if necessary

samples at all levels and refine categories tree

## intro

This is to help me keep clear and consistent on how to go about setting up a database and filling it up with information. The contents of this post is far from being finished, it will definitely change as work is done. Read it as a kind of a diary of thinking up a freamwork.

I spent 11 years teaching English in Spain and while listening to people speaking English in the classroom and in the street, I witnessed something that struck me first and kept fascinating me all those years. When trying to express themselves in English and feeling unable to find the right word, Spanish speakers have a secret weapon that had been absolutely unknown to me, someone whose first language is Hungarian. This secret weapon is the habit of using Spanish words with an English-sounding pronunciation to fill the gaps of your English vocabulary.

And it works, most of the time. Depending on the speakers' level of English and linguistic awareness, they tend to hazard this technique with various degrees of confidence, the "English-sounding" pronunciation might be far from perfect, spelling might turn out to be plain Spanish when done in writing and the right register is very often missed but communication is maintained and the message is delivered.

Researchers call it L1 interference and it's easy to pinpoint the background reasons to it in the case of Spanish and English. There's a vast amount of shared vocabulary between them. Spanish is a Latin language and English has a body of Latin loan words coming directly from church Latin or via French. [This website](https://www.colorincolorado.org/guide/cognate-list-english-and-spanish) claims 30-40% of all English words "have a related word in Spanish" and [here is](https://www.quia.com/files/quia/users/ijcano/SPAN_FALL_2010/SPAN_2001/Instant-Spanish-Vocabulary---September-2010.pdf) an attempt, written for English speakers, to help them boost their Spanish vocabulary.

Categorizing and quantifying different types of errors at different levels of the learning process could serve the purpose of offering statistical insights to leaerners and teachers alike.

## the data

Part of my job was marking writing, mock exams included, so I was exposed to written Spanglish. There was an emphasis on giving learners (and their parents) quality feedback on both written and spoken English. After a while my initial amusement turned into an interest in trying to get a deeper understanding of the types of mistakes my students made and I started collecting them. This project is nothing else than an attempt to build a framework around the data in my notes. Of course, more data would offer more refined statistics but that remains an open question for a next step in the future.

## levels and courses

This is a list of Common European Framework of Reference levels and the preparation courses at the academy my data comes from. From B1 up, each level is covered by two 1-year courses, named loosely after their respective Cambridge exam. Since these courses break up each level into two sublevels, including both levels AND courses in the database will offer more refined statistics. There's no data for A1 and A2 levels at the moment.

| CEFR level |    course    |
| :---------: | :----------- |
| A1         | ...          |
| A2         | ...          |
| B1         | PET1         |
| B1         | PET2         |
| B2         | First1       |
| B2         | First2       |
| C1         | Advanced1    |
| C1         | Advanced2    |
| C2         | Proficiency1 |
| C2         | Proficiency2 |

## design principles

Needless to say, I'm aiming at an even data distribution across all levels/courses in terms of the number of writers (ie. students) and "sessions" (ie. pieces of writing), otherwise some of the queries below would bring up distorted statistics.

## error categories

As long as an error fits into one of a series of distinct, exclusive categories, no problem. That's the scenario I had in mind when I started playing with the idea of an error bank. As soon as I started looking at examples, I realized that a bulk of them falls into multiple types. _friday_ is a spelling mistake but it could/should be listed as a capitalization error as well. Should these two categories be exclusive or inclusive (one category being part of the other)? A framework needs to be developed but it can only be done on the fly, renaming, adjusting, restructuring it while filling up the database.

### exclusive categories

They are what they are. Either one or the other.

Example from __vocab__: ...
Example from __syntax__: ...
Example from __tenses__: ...

### inclusive categories

one error might belong to multiple categories
* eg. **I can give to you my bike.*
	+ a preposition error
	+ a verb pattern error
* eg.
	+ *my restaurant favourite*
		- adj.
	+ *about my places favourites*
		- adj.
		- sing_plur
* eg. __vocab.form__ errors tend to be relevant in a category within __syntax__ - get rid of vocab.form? - no.
* **friday*
	+ spelling
	+ capitals

sometimes the boundaries are not so clear
* **They put very big tapas.* - put & poner(se) - are they false friends or do they just sound too similar to be distinguished?

many of the vocab.form type errors are also syntax errors
```
SELECT errors.id, error, correct, spelling_id, vocab_id, syntax_id, tense_id
FROM errors
INNER JOIN vocab ON vocab.id = vocab_id
WHERE form = true;
```

The interesting thing is, many of these errors come across as one type but the root of the error is another type. Eg.: **the people is very nice* As a teacher marking this, you would probably underline the word "is" in this phrase but the real reason is the Spanish equivalent of the word "people" (la gente), which is always uncountable. Should it be classified as a vocab error or a syntax error? A good database should probably shore it up at both sides.

### a tree view with examples:

__spelling__ (sub-categories are exclusive)
* __orthography__ (incorrect spelling patterns), eg. **wicht* -> *with*
* __capitals__, eg. **friday* -> *Friday*

SQL:
```
SELECT errors.id, error, correct, spelling.id, spelling.capitals, spelling.orthography FROM errors
JOIN spelling ON spelling.id = spelling_id
WHERE errors.spelling_id IS NOT NULL;
```

__vocabulary__ (inclusive sub-categories here!)
* __meaning__, eg. ...
* __form__, eg. ...
* __use__, eg. ...
* __register__, eg. ...

eg. they put very good tapas (poner)
* NOTE: the notion of vocabulary includes MEANING & FORM
* so the appropriate word is used but with an incorrect garammar, that is still counted as a vocabulary mistake
	+ eg. **They serve a very big tapas.* -> *They serve very big tapas.*
* but if relevant, also marked for syntax at the same time
	+ eg. as mentioned above, **the people is very nice* is marked for both vocab and syntax
* funny vs fun: treated as two words -> **it's very funny*: labelled as __vocab.meaning__

* __false_friend__ (inclusive with __meaning__)
	+ eg. **The plate was potatoes with bacon.* (un plato "dish")
	+ did you know there are "false false friends", probably based on similar-sounding forms?
		- **In the restaurant have a friendly atmosphere.* (hay)
		- **In the street have a lot of children.* (hay)
		- **They put very good tapas.* (poner)
	+ false friends are also marked for vocabulary errors

* __collocation__, eg. ...

* __phrasal_verb__ (inclusive with __meaning__ or __form__ or __use__), eg. ...

* __preposition__ (probably inclusive with __meaning__ or __form__ or __use__), eg. ...
	+ eg. **I'll give it back for you.* -> *I'll give it back to you.*

__prefix__ (inclusive with __form__), eg. ...

__suffix__ (inclusive with __form__), eg. ...

__chunk__ (inclusive with __form__), eg. ...

SQL:
```
SELECT errors.id, error, correct, meaning, form, use, register, false_friend, collocation, phrasal_verb, preposition, prefix, suffix, chunk FROM errors
JOIN vocab ON vocab.id = vocab_id
WHERE errors.vocab_id IS NOT NULL;
```


verb pattern - verb patterns: https://dictionary.cambridge.org/grammar/british-grammar/verb-patterns
* the cases mentioned in the above link plus give, send, etc: direct-indirect objects

word order - word order: https://dictionary.cambridge.org/grammar/british-grammar/word-order-structures?q=word+order
* although word order is part of syntax, for now, a word order column is still included but a word order error is always marked for syntax as well
	+ when data accumulates and we'll see what other types of syntax errors emerge, we'll decide if it worth keeping or can be deleted

syntax
* eg. * Is a fast food restaurant. -> It is a fast food restaurant.
* eg. * I know this people. (also marked for vocabulary)

tenses

other

marked for 2 categories:
* * I know this people. (vocabulary + syntax)
* word order is always marked for syntax as well
* I can give to you my bike. (preposition + verb pattern)


pronunciation: no records, unfortunately

## error categories expanded into a tree

SPELLING
* capitals
* l1lettering

VOCABULARY
* meaning
* form
* false friend
* collocation
* phrasal_verb
* preposition
* prefix
* suffix
* chunk

SYNTAX
* missing_subj
* obj
* indirect_obj
* verb_pattern
* adj
* adv
* sing_plur
* articles
* third_singular

TENSES
* pres_simp
* pres_cont
* pres_perf
* pres_perf_cont
* past_simp
* past_cont
* past_perf
* past_perf_cont
* fut_sim
* fut_cont
* fut_perf
* fut_perf_cont
* arranged
* insta_decision
* gonna_plan
* gonna_evidence

## creating records

### focus on the target language

Looking at a simple example, when dealing with a tense error like **This weekend I'll go to Granada with my friends.*, although the wrong word is "will", the chosen label should have nothing to do with it or __fut_simp__. In order to be consitent and informative, it should be labelled according to what the intended (but missed) wording would be. In this case this is what we call "Present Continuous for arrangements" (__arranged__ for short in our db).

You might be tempted to think that the error **give for you information* is a __vocab > preposition__ error and cast it that. However, when categorizing mistakes it's essential to focus on the target language rather than what emerges from the erroneous form. Although there's a preposition in the error, the intended/target language is indirect object. We should use/create categories based on that target language so it got labbelled as __syntax > indirect_obj__.

That means the following:

| error                     | preposition | indirect_obj |
| :------------------------ |:-----------:|:------------:|
| give for you information  | no          | yes          |
| I can give to you my bike.| no          | yes          |
| I couldn't write you.     | yes         | yes          |

still, if possible, avoid casting errors under multiple categories
* reasons
	+ distorts statistics?
	+ leads to more error-prone records?

### 2 errors in one

#### a) an error cluster

when 2 or more errors in one: recorded as 2 entries, pruning the text a bit in order to focus on the error.
* eg. * **Also put in the summer snails*. became 3 records
	+ * **They also put snails in the summer.* (vocabulary error)
	+ * **Also offer snails in the summer.* (syntax: missing subject)
	+ * **They also offer in the summer snails.* (word order)

#### b) one error allowing for multiple interpetations

**I know this people.* Should it be labelled as __vocab.form__ or as __syntax.sing_plur__? Or both?

It is true we see a fair number of incorrect use of the word "this" and that's the incorrect word here but what really generates this error is the Spanish word *la gente* which is singular. Examples without the word *this* attest to it, **the people is very nice*. The are categorized as __vocab.form__ although errors like **I like this restaurants* will go under __syntaxsing_plur__.

multiple categories used:
* __false_friend__ - __vocab.meaning__

## example queries

some examples:
* list and sort the most common spelling mistakes and the correct forms at a given level
* show a statistical overview of the number of errors using false friends across different levels
* show a statistical overview of all the different types of errors across different levels (begs for some kind of dataviz)
* list and sort all errors according to frequency, filtering for a selected level
* list and sort all types errors according to frequency, filtering for a selected level
* list and sort selected categories of errors according to frequency, filtering for a selected level

list all spelling errors
```
SELECT error, correct
FROM errors
JOIN spelling ON spelling.id = errors.spelling_id;
```

list spelling errors of the "capitals" type
```
SELECT error, correct
FROM errors
JOIN spelling ON spelling.id = errors.spelling_id
WHERE capitals = TRUE;
```

spelling errors grouped by correct form, groups sorted by group frequency count, all levels
```
SELECT
  CASE WHEN row_num = 1 THEN correct ELSE NULL END AS correct,
  CASE WHEN row_num = 1 THEN frequency ELSE NULL END AS frequency,
  error
FROM (
  SELECT correct, error,
         ROW_NUMBER() OVER (PARTITION BY correct ORDER BY error) AS row_num,
         COUNT(*) OVER (PARTITION BY correct) AS frequency,
         COUNT(*) OVER (PARTITION BY error) AS error_count,
         group_frequency
  FROM (
    SELECT correct, error,
           COUNT(*) OVER (PARTITION BY correct) AS group_frequency
    FROM errors
    WHERE spelling_id IS NOT NULL
  ) e
) e
WHERE row_num = 1 OR error_count = 1
ORDER BY group_frequency DESC;
```

spelling errors grouped by correct form, groups sorted by group frequency count, level 2
```
SELECT
  CASE WHEN row_num = 1 THEN correct ELSE NULL END AS correct,
  CASE WHEN row_num = 1 THEN frequency ELSE NULL END AS frequency,
  error
FROM (
  SELECT correct, error,
         ROW_NUMBER() OVER (PARTITION BY correct ORDER BY error) AS row_num,
         COUNT(*) OVER (PARTITION BY correct) AS frequency,
         COUNT(*) OVER (PARTITION BY error) AS error_count,
         group_frequency
  FROM (
    SELECT correct, error,
           COUNT(*) OVER (PARTITION BY correct) AS group_frequency
    FROM errors
    WHERE spelling_id IS NOT NULL
		AND level_id = 2
  ) e
) e
WHERE row_num = 1 OR error_count = 1
ORDER BY group_frequency DESC;
```

## landing page

X students
X levels
X courses
X pieces of writing
X errors categorized as
* ... (a list + number of errors)
X average number of errors in assignments per level

## the SQL to create the db

```
CREATE TABLE spelling (
id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
capitals BOOLEAN DEFAULT false,
l1lettering BOOLEAN DEFAULT false,
typo BOOLEAN DEFAULT false
);

CREATE TABLE vocab (
id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
meaning BOOLEAN DEFAULT false,
form BOOLEAN DEFAULT false,
register BOOLEAN DEFAULT false,
false_friend BOOLEAN DEFAULT false,
collocation BOOLEAN DEFAULT false,
phrasal_verb BOOLEAN DEFAULT false,
preposition BOOLEAN DEFAULT false,
prefix BOOLEAN DEFAULT false,
suffix BOOLEAN DEFAULT false
);

CREATE TABLE syntax (
id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
missing_subj BOOLEAN DEFAULT false,
obj BOOLEAN DEFAULT false,
indirect_obj BOOLEAN DEFAULT false,
verb_pattern BOOLEAN DEFAULT false,
adj BOOLEAN DEFAULT false,
adv BOOLEAN DEFAULT false,
sing_plur BOOLEAN DEFAULT false,
articles BOOLEAN DEFAULT false
third_singular BOOLEAN DEFAULT false
);

CREATE TABLE tenses (
id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
pres_simp BOOLEAN DEFAULT false,
pres_cont BOOLEAN DEFAULT false,
pres_perf BOOLEAN DEFAULT false,
pres_perf_cont BOOLEAN DEFAULT false,
past_simp BOOLEAN DEFAULT false,
past_cont BOOLEAN DEFAULT false,
past_perf BOOLEAN DEFAULT false,
past_perf_cont BOOLEAN DEFAULT false,
fut_simp BOOLEAN DEFAULT false,
fut_cont BOOLEAN DEFAULT false,
fut_perf BOOLEAN DEFAULT false,
fut_perf_cont BOOLEAN DEFAULT false,
arranged BOOLEAN DEFAULT false,
insta_decision BOOLEAN DEFAULT false,
gonna_plan BOOLEAN DEFAULT false,
gonna_evidence BOOLEAN DEFAULT false,
);

CREATE TABLE levels (
	id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
	cefr VARCHAR(2) NOT NULL,
	course VARCHAR(15)
);

INSERT INTO
	levels (cefr, course)
VALUES
	('B1', 'PET1'),
	('B1', 'PET2'),
	('B2', 'First1'),
	('B2', 'First2'),
	('C1', 'Advanced1'),
	('C1', 'Advanced2'),
	('C2', 'Proficiency1'),
	('C2', 'Proficiency2');

CREATE TABLE learners (
	id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
	first_name VARCHAR(15) NOT NULL,
	surname1 VARCHAR(15) NOT NULL,
	surname2 VARCHAR(15) NOT NULL
);

CREATE TABLE assignment (
	id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
	learner_id INTEGER REFERENCES learners(id),
	level_id INTEGER REFERENCES levels(id)
	date DATE NOT NULL,
	specifier VARCHAR(15) NOT NULL
);

CREATE TABLE errors (
	id SERIAL PRIMARY KEY,
	error VARCHAR(70) NOT NULL,
	correct VARCHAR(70) NOT NULL,
	spelling_id INTEGER REFERENCES spelling(id),
	vocab_id INTEGER REFERENCES vocab(id),
	syntax_id INTEGER REFERENCES syntax(id),
	tense_id INTEGER REFERENCES tenses(id),
	level_id INTEGER REFERENCES levels(id),
	learner_id INTEGER REFERENCES learners(id),
	assignment_id INTEGER REFERENCES assignment(id)
);

INSERT INTO "public"."errors" ("id", "error", "correct", "spelling", "vocabulary", "false_friend", "prefix", "suffix", "collocation", "preposition", "syntax", "tenses", "other", "level_id", "learner_id", "assignment_id") VALUES
(1, 'I''ll give it back for you.', 'I''ll give it back to you.', 'f', 'f', 'f', 'f', 'f', 'f', 't', 'f', 'f', 'f', 1, 1, 1),
(2, 'I go to Almeria this week.', 'I''m going to Almeria this week.', 'f', 'f', 'f', 'f', 'f', 'f', 'f', 'f', 't', 'f', 1, 1, 1),
(3, 'I forgot read your email.', 'I forgot to read your email.', 'f', 'f', 'f', 'f', 'f', 'f', 'f', 'f', 'f', 'f', 1, 1, 2);


```

